


Volume column effects are selected by pressing A-H in the first
column of the effects.
	Ax = fine volume slide up by x
	Bx = fine volume slide down by x
	Cx = volume slide up by x
	Dx = volume slide down by x
	Ex = pitch slide down by x
	Fx = pitch slide up by x
	Gx = portamento to note with speed x
	Hx = vibrato with depth 



Effects.
Axx Set Speed.
	I prefer to think of this command as "Set Frames per Row".
	Normally, the tracker operates at around 50 frames a
	second. If the rows were played at this speed, then a huge
	amount of space would be required to enter the pattern data.
	Instead, setting the 'speed' of the song will cause the
	tracker to wait on the current row for 'xx' frames. Hence,
	setting the speed at 50 (decimal = 32hex) will cause each
	row to last about a second - quite a long time! The default
	is A06. The initial speed can be set in the variables
	screen on F12.
	If two Axx commands are given in the same row, then the
	command in the higher channel (by number) will take effect.
Bxx Jump to order.
	Causes the song to jump to order xx (hex). This is often
	used to create looping songs.
	If two Bxx commands are given, then the command in the
	higher channel will take effect.
Cxx Break to row.
	The Command Cxx signifies the end of the current pattern,
	and also that the next pattern should be played from row
	xx (hex)
	If two Cxx commands are given... you know :)
D0x Volume slide down
	The volume slide down command causes the volume of the
	note to be reduced by x for each frame after (for that
	row). ie. If you have a note at volume 64, with command
	D01 and speed A06, then the final volume will be 64-5=59.
	A note at volume 32 with command D02 at speed A05 will
	result in a volume of 24.
	For greater S3M compatibility, D0F will cause the volume
	to drop by 15 EVERY frame, instead of just off-note frames.
	Here's a full frame-by-frame description which should provide
	greater understanding:
	At 'speed' 4:
	C-4 01 .. D04
	What this does is:
	Frame 1: Plays C-4 with instrument 1
	Frame 2: Lowers the volume by 4
	Frame 3: Lowers the volume by 4
	Frame 4: Lowers the volume by 4
	The next frame will be controlled by the next row of
	information.
	Dx0 Volume slide up.
		Operates exactly the same way as D0x, but slides the
		volume up by 'x'. Volumes cannot exceed 64 (checked
		and limited internally).
		For greater S3M compatibility, DF0 will cause the volume
		to rise by 15 EVERY frame, instead of just off-note frames.
	DFx Fine volume slide down.
		Takes the volume down by x at the start of the row.
	DxF Fine volume slide up.
		Takes the volume up by x at the start of the row.
Exx Pitch slide down
	The pitch will slide down with speed xx (hex). In linear
	frequency mode, a pitch slide down by a particular value
	will always cause the same "pitch interval" - this does
	not occur in Amiga frequency mode. Valid ranges for xx
	are between 0 and 0DFh (as > 0E0h will be interpreted as
	fine slides)
	EFx Fine pitch slide down
		Slides the pitch down by x at the start of the row.
	EEx Extra fine pitch slide down
		Same as EFx, but 4 times finer. (ie. EE4 is equivalent to
		EF1)
Fxx Pitch Slide up
	FFx Fine Pitch slide up
	FEx Extra fine pitch slide up
		Operates in the same manner as the Exx commands, but
		slides the pitch up. If the pitch gets 'too high', then
		the channel is turned off.
Gxx Portamento to note.
	This command requires 2 parameters: A note to slide to
	and a speed. Example:
	C-4 01 ~~ .00
	G-4 01 ~~ G08
	~~~ ~~ ~~ G00
	~~~ ~~ ~~ G00
	This will cause the note C-4 to slide to G-4 with speed 8.
	You *CAN* change the sample that the note is sliding to.
	It is a good idea to make sure that the C5Speed of the
	samples is similar, if you want to try this! The new sample
	will play from it's beginning.
Hxy Vibrato with speed x, depth y
	Causes the frequency to osciallte with depth 'y' at speed
	'x' which causes an interesting effect. Don't get carried
	away with it though! If you specify EITHER x or y as 0, then
	the previous value will be used.
Ixy Tremor with ontime x, offtime y.
	Causes the volume of the instrument to remain normal for
	x frames, then sets the volume to 0 for y frames.
Jxy Arpeggio with halftones x, y.
	This causes the note to quickly cycle through three notes -
	the note playing, a note x halftones above, and a note y
	halftones above. This causes an effect similar to old
	C-64 chords.
	Example: C-4 01 ~~ J47 will cause the notes C-4, E-4 and
	G-4 to be cycled.
Kxx Dual command: Vibrato + Dxx (Volume slide)
	Note: The vibrato could have been set with either Hxx or
Uxx
Lxx Dual Command: G00 + Dxx (Portamento to and Volume slide)
Mxx Set channel volume
	Each channel has a volume range from 0->40h. The lower
	the value, the softer the notes in the channel. This
	command is convenient for making 'echoes'... you won't have
	to modify the echoing channel from the original, except
	for placing a M20 at the top of it!
	Values greater than 40h are ignored at playtime.
N0x, Nx0, NFx, NxF Slide channel volume commands
	These commands work in the same manner as the slide
	volume commands, but operate on the channel volume,
	rather than directly on the note volume.
Oxx Set sample offset.
	This will cause a sample to be played from offset yxx00h.
	This is useful to skip past the first part of a sample
	which may have a loud hit, or to start a speech sample
	half way through.
	If you specify a value PAST the end of a sample, then the
	command is ignored.
	The "y" part of yxx00h is set with command "SAy"
	Example:
	... .. .. SA5
	C-4 01 .. O10
	This will play note C-4, instrument 1 at offset 51000hex
	Note to programmers: Oxx for 16-bit samples will move
	to the xx00h*2 position in the sample - ie. the 'xx00th'
	sample.
P0x, Px0, PFx, PxF Slide panning commands.
	These work in the same maner as the slide volume
	commands, but operate on the channel panning. P0x slides
	the panning right, while Px0 slides the panning left.
Qxy Retriggers a note after y frames with volume modifier x.
	This will cause a sample to be replayed from it's
	beginning after every y frames. 'x' can be any of the
	following:
	Value Effect on volume each retrig.
	0 No change
	1 -1
	2 -2
	3 -4
	4 -8
	5 -16
	6 *2/3
	7 *1/2
	8 No change
	9 +1
	A +2
	B +4
	C +8
	D +16
	E *3/2
	F *2
Rxy Tremelo with speed x, depth y
	This command acts similarly to the vibrato command, but
	affects the note volume, instead of the pitch. If you specify
	EITHER x or y as 0, then the previous value will be used.
S3x Sets vibrato waveform to x
S4x Sets tremelo waveform to x
S5x Sets panbrello waveform to x
	Values for x: 0 = sine wave
	1 = square wave
	2 = Ramp down
	3 = Random!
	S70 Past note cut
	S71 Past note off
	S72 Past note fade
		With the loss of 1-1 correspondence of editing channels
		to internal playing channels, these commands provide
		control over notes that have already been played by a
		channel.
		Example:
		Consider the following situation, where instrument
		1, notes C-4 & D-4 map to a looped sample, and the
		New Note Action is set to continue.
		C-4 01 64 .~~
		D-4 01 64 .~~
		E-4 01 64 .~~ <--- Use S70 here!
		Ordinarily, control would be lost over C-4 and D-4, but
		using command S70 at the point indicated, the notes C-4
		and D-4 would be stopped immediately when the note E-4
		plays.
		Similarly, note off commands and Fadeout commands can
		also be issued.
		Note: You *MUST* be in instrument mode for these
		to have any significance.
	S6x Pattern delay for x ticks.
	S73 Set NNA to note cut
	S74 Set NNA to continue
	S75 Set NNA to note off
	S76 Set NNA to note fade
		These options allow you to override the default NNA for a
		particular NOTE (ie. it does not affect the instrument)
		See section 2.5 for an explanation of NNAs.
		Note: You *MUST* be in instrument mode for these to have
		any effect.
	S77 Turn Volume envelope off.
		Stops the processing of the volume envelope. This is for the
		times that you don't want to use the volume envelope that
		you've created.
	S78 Turn volume envelope on.
		Sometimes, you'll decide that it's better not to use the
		volume envelope for most cases, but you may just want to
		use it a few times - this is the command that lets you
		do that!
		Note: You *MUST* be in instrument mode for this to work.
	S8x Set panning position
		Set panning position, S80 is leftmost, S8F is rightmost.
		This is an obsolete command, provided only for ST3
		compatibility. Use command Xxx instead.
	S91 Set surround sound!
		For those of you who are lucky enough to have a dolby
		surround sound decoder (myself not included - so if ya
		wanna send me something.....), this *should* cause the
		sound to come from the surround speaker. This is a
		pseudo-panning command, and issuing either Xxx or S8x
		will cause the surround sound to be reset.
		If you try and play Surround Sound on a GUS, Interwave
		or AWE32, it will be played as a central pan.
		SAy Set high-offset. Check Oxx for an example.
	SB0 Set loopback point
	SBx Loop x times.
		This pattern space-saving feature will cause the pattern
		to be looped x times back to the last SB0. Note that you
		can only loop within the pattern! Also, each channel has
		it's own loop-back information... so you HAVE to have the
	SB0 and SBx in the same channel for it to operate.
	SCx Note cut after x frames
		This will cause a note to be immediately stopped after x
		frames. It is similar to issuing a "^^^" in the note column,
		just that it has a finer control over timing.
	SDx Note delay for x frames
		Actually, this command works like "interpretation" delay
		for x frames. Any data - note, sample/instrument or volume
		in the channel will not be interpreted until x frames into
		the row.
	SEx Pattern delay for x rows
		This will cause a "pause" on the row for effectively x rows
		longer.
		Note that if TWO pattern delay commands are issued, then
		the only the command in the higher channel will be considered.
Txx Set tempo to xx
	Valid ranges are between 20h and 0FFh. The higher the
	value, the faster the playback. This essentially
	determines the time length of each frame, by the following
	formulas:
	Frames per minute = 24*Tempo
	equivalently:
	Frames per second = 0.4*Tempo
T0x Tempo slide down
T1x Tempo slide up
	Tempo slides up and down are used to smoothly modify the
	speed of the song. The tempo is modified by ~x every
	non-row frame.
Uxy Fine vibrato with speed x, depth y
	Same as vibrato, but 4 times finer in depth.
Vxx Set Global volume
	Valid ranges are between 0 and 80h. All notes playing are
	affected by this change.
	Values greater than 80h are ignored at playtime.
W0x, Wx0, WFx, WxF Slide global volume
	Similar to the Dxx commands, but operate on the global
	volume. Useful when fading out songs.
Xxx Set panning position
	Sets the panning position anywhere from left to right (X00
	is left, XFF is right).
Yxy Panbrello with speed x, depth y.
	What the hell is panbrello? Well, it's a word that I coined
	late one night after a friend suggested that there should
	be a random pan position command. I decided.. why not - I'll
	make the vibrato/tremelo equivalent of panning! And so you
	have here, 'panbrello.' What this does is instead of
	oscillating frequency (pitch) or volume, it oscillates the
	panning position about the 'set' panning position for a
	channel. This is for you techno freaks out there who want
	another function to stuff around with! :)
	The random pan position can be achieved by setting the
	waveform to 3 (ie. a S53 command). In this case *ONLY*, the
	speed actually is interpreted as a delay in frames before
	another random value is found. so S14 will be a very QUICK
	panbrello, and S44 will be a slower panbrello. With any
	other waveform, the higher the value for x, the faster the
	panbrello, like vibrato and tremelo. If you don't know what
	I'm talking about, check out the stereo-indicators on the
	info page (don't forget that you have to be in stereo mode!)
	If you specify EITHER x or y as 0, then the previous value
	will be used.